[David] Previously
on House of David…
To the house of Saul.
king of all Israel.
[David] The lion has returned.
And where were you? Off…
singing about your mother?
[Saul] What of the
border village?
[Jonathan] I saw the print of a
hand larger than a weaver's basket.
Samuel. tonight we celebrate.
[Samuel] You have twisted
the throne to your own glory.
So God chose you as king.
now he chooses another.
- I will kill the lion.
- You cannot face it alone.
[grunts]
- [growls]
- [David] I can and I will.
[shouts]
- [child] It's too early.
- No. we're here just in time.
And this will not happen
for another 28 years.
When the alignment of the
sun and moon and the stars
are just as they were
at the dawn of creation.
[gasps] Look. David.
The sun is rising.
You remember it?
The Birkat Hachamah?
Just follow along.
[all singing in Hebrew]
You should not be
here. Neither of you.
You and your child
defile the name of Jesse
and all of Bethlehem.
You stay here. okay?
Perhaps you have
heard. I see things.
Visions.
And would you like to
know what I have seen?
History will know my son's name
long after yours is forgotten.
How dare you?
- [spits]
- Come. David.
Am I a curse?
No. David.
You are fearfully
and wonderfully made.
Son.
Quiet yourself and listen.
What do you hear?
Nothing.
Close your eyes
and listen closer.
Not just with your ears.
but with your soul.
Deep calls to deep.
And in the still and
quiet you will hear God.
Listen to him.
He will tell you who
you are. not them.
[birds chirping]
[waves crashing]
I hear nothing.
You will.
[grunting]
[young David] Brothers.
can I play with you?
Eliab. wait for me!
Not beyond the wall. David.
[young David] I know.
- [parent] David…
- [young David] I know.
[grunts]
Deep calls to deep.
[inhales deeply]
Show me who I am.
[growling]
[parent] Stay very still. David.
He will sense your
fear. Understand?
Calm your breath.
And David…
my son…
I love you with all my heart.
Ima…
- [screaming]
- Ima. Ima. no!
Ima. no!
- Ima. wait. No!
- Run. David! Run!
[young David] No. Ima!
[parent screams]
- [young David crying]
- [Father] Nitzevet!
[Nitzevet screams]
- [shouting]
- [growling]
[David panting]
David.
[Nitzevet panting]
Nitzevet!
What have you done. David?
It's all right. my
darling. It's all…
It's all right.
David. your mother asks for you.
[Nitzevet] David. come.
Come.
I fear that life will
be so very hard for you.
I won't be here to protect you.
No. you will be
better. You will.
He calls to me.
[breathing shakily]
I know it. I know it to be so.
He showed me what
you would become.
- What?
- [Nitzevet breathes shakily]
Remember…
[grunting. breathing shakily]
[Father] David…
Ima.
[Father whispers indistinctly]
- Come. David. David. come.
- No. Remember what? No.
- Ima. no. No. Please.
- David. come. Son.
Stay. Stay here.
You stay here.
[no audible dialogue]
Your mother is no more.
Go to the east field.
Keep the sheep.
Why?
Because to grieve. I can
no longer look upon you.
- Go.
- I want to see her.
Leave this house.
- No. I want to see Ima.
- Leave this house!
Go!
Tend the sheep. Go.
[wincing]
[Father] Please. I am
asking for your help.
I know everyone here.
Please. I beg of you.
- [villager] I don't want to.
- [villagers chattering]
Saba. look. Look!
[Father] Huh?
[villager] It's the boy. David?
[villagers murmuring]
[villager] It's true.
[sighs] My son.
My son.
Are you all right?
[sighs]
- [Father grunts]
- [onlookers groan]
When will you learn?
Do not defy me again.
[sighs]
He won't scare you anymore.
[David grunts]
[sniffs. sighs]
[villagers chattering]
- Father?
- [groans]
My child.
[Mychal sniffling]
How long have I been sleeping?
[stammers] I will fetch
the others. all right?
I'll be quick.
- [people in castle chattering]
- [hammering]
Father has awakened. Again.
He seems more like
himself this time.
I will alert the queen.
[sniffling]
[Jonathan] Mychal.
Speak to me.
Hmm?
Uh. his… screams. [crying]
[hammering continues]
It's as… as if he were
being burnt alive.
I cannot purge
them from my mind.
Please.
Another time.
[Mychal sighs]
What did Samuel do to him?
I don't know.
What I tell you now cannot
be known. not by anyone.
[breathes shakily]
Samuel intends to anoint another as
he anointed me. [inhales sharply]
[scoffs]
My love. you have been in
fever. dreaming many things.
He told me as clearly
as I talk to you.
Only then did I
fall into darkness.
But that is treason.
[Saul] Why would you
allow Samuel to leave?
Samuel's power is
not of this world.
My blade would do nothing.
[sighs]
You have been
anointed three times.
The people. they revere you.
People revere Samuel also.
[Saul's spouse sighs]
Abner.
Find him.
Have him followed.
Bring me the one he anoints.
It shall be done.
[breathes shakily]
[Saul's spouse] I have asked many
things of you over the years.
The one Samuel anoints.
he must be slain along with
everyone in his household.
Any sign of weakness
in our house
is ammunition for
the Philistines.
You understand?
Whom do you serve?
How could you ask me that?
Say it.
I serve the house of Saul.
[speaks indistinctly] …the gods.
Hand me the strength of my ancestors.
[Philistine soldier] My
king. They have arrived.
[Philistine king 1] Greetings.
brother kings of Philistia.
I have long dreamed of this day
where the five of us would find
cause to assemble instead of fight.
Enough of this. Why have
you brought us here?
The Hebrews have destroyed
the house of Amalek.
- [laughs]
- [laughs] This cannot be.
Yet it is.
Fortune has turned
in Saul's favor.
Saul is the king of donkeys.
The Hebrew tribes are nothing.
Yet Agag. with chariots.
idols and countless men.
has been swallowed by the hands
of those tribes of nothing.
Rumors.
[Philistine king 2] So
we fortify our cities.
No.
With five unified armies.
we shall ride against Saul
and when we do.
our gods and nightmares
will go before us.
And how do we know this is
not just blind vengeance?
Saul having killed your father
on the battlefield years ago.
There is not a leader among
us to command the five armies.
Certainly not you.
Achish. King of Gath.
[clicks tongue] I
miss your father.
He had better taste in wine.
Prepare the horses.
Yes. my king.
Where are we going?
To summon new gods.
[folk music playing]
[all chatter. laugh]
Eat. Drink. Please. Enjoy.
Ah. my people. the pride
of Judah has returned.
- Welcome. [groans]
- [Eliab groans]
[Adriel] The sons of Jesse
and the captain of the
king's guard. Joab.
Men who have fought
under my banner.
My banner!
I now return them to
you. alive and well!
[all cheering]
Brethren. I bring greetings
from the house of Saul.
king of the 12 tribes
and lord of war.
And congratulations
to the bride. Rachel.
and her puzzling choice
of my friend. Jakob.
[chuckling]
Of all the heroes she could have
wed she picked this one. huh?
[all laughing]
The king holds all his
people in high favor.
Not the least of which
is the tribe of Judah.
[tribespeople cheering]
So he sends his own kin
to wish your union well.
Make welcome Mirab and Mychal.
daughters of King Saul.
[tribespeople cheering]
Er…
Hello. people of Judah.
Greetings from the
king and our family.
We prosper only if you
are all happy and well.
and so it seems you are today.
[all chuckle]
Congratulations to the new
couple. Jakob and Rachel.
Names descended from
our forefathers.
Just like the old stories.
The king's house intends to forgive
all debts of this new family.
as well as give them land
and sheep from our own herds
so that you may
begin your journey
with the riches and freedom
that match your new love.
[tribespeople cheering]
Congratulations.
[Adriel] Please. enjoy
the wine. Welcome.
[chuckles]
- Hmm? Hmm.
- Lovely sentiments.
- Really. I'm deeply moved.
- Don't be that way.
Hmm. perhaps they-they met
and truly loved each other
at first glance.
Mmm. Uh-huh.
Or they met a week ago
when her father traded
his beloved daughter
for a dozen sheep.
Yeah. Touching. touching words.
Mother would be so proud.
Oh. please.
This royal visit is nothing
more than a distraction.
Parade the princesses
around. maybe…
maybe they won't notice their
king is losing his mind.
Why do you say these things?
If Father needs our
service here. so be it.
And we have done our duties.
So surely we can leave now.
- I want to dance.
- What?
I'm going to dance. [chuckles]
- Why? No.
- [Mychal chuckles]
Princess. please don't.
Joab. Joab.
Don't be jealous. Huh?
[chuckles]
[all exclaiming]
[all chuckle. cheer]
David will play us a
better song. Better.
[singing in Hebrew]
[singing continues]
Did you write this song?
Uh. this? [chuckles]
Uh. not this.
I-I learned it from my mother.
Your mother?
It is beautiful.
She's a good teacher.
Yes. She was.
Perhaps I can write a
song for you someday.
Who are you?
Focus on entertaining
the guests. shepherd.
That's what you're
here for. hmm?
Joab.
For your efforts.
[David scoffs]
This is nice.
Fresh from the battlefield.
An Amalekite blade?
Watch your head. cousin.
Joab. leave him be.
Yes. Princess.
It's time to leave now.
I've arranged lodging for you and
Mirab at my father's vineyard.
We'll return to the
fortress in the morning.
[David chuckles]
Are you trying to
get yourself killed?
[David] That knife is cursed.
It's metal.
It's used by blood drinkers
from pagan rituals.
- The seer forbid it.
- [Eliab] We need it.
- I don't care where it comes from.
- I do.
Joab is not a man to be crossed.
- He's our kin.
- [Eliab] Yes.
And he will just as
quickly cut your throat.
Now play me a song that
will bring me a wife.
Not something sad and dreary. but
something that stirs the passions.
My songs are not sad and dreary.
[Eliab] Just play.
Stirs the passions.
Why is it you never
defend my honor like that?
I treat you both
the same. Princess.
Yes. Of course.
Keep telling yourself
that story. okay?
- [birds chirping]
- [rooster crows]
[David] Okay. let's go.
[Eliab] Do I not need to.
uh. build up speed? Like a…
Like an eagle!
[sighs]
[David chuckles] That's
not how it works.
What time is it?
It's morning.
Here. Give it.
[grunts]
How do you do this so well?
- It's easy. Give me another rock.
- Easy?
- Here. Again.
- [David] Yeah.
[Eliab] Oh.
[whistles] You have too
much time with that thing.
- I have nothing else to do.
- [Eliab] Mmm.
What will you give me if I
can hit two jars at once?
You cannot.
- What would you give me?
- [Eliab] A mule.
[chuckles] I do
not want your mule.
Well. not my mule. I will
give you Abinadab's mule.
What? Who's giving my baby?
His mule and an acre of land.
- You do not own an acre of land.
- I will find it.
And if you miss. what do
you wager in return. hmm?
Pointless question.
He has nothing.
No. [stutters] If he misses.
he will never show his face
in town again to disgrace us.
- Nathaneel.
- What. brother?
- [Eliab] You are the worst.
- You agree.
- You just choose not to say it aloud.
- Enough.
Okay. I do not want his
mule or your acre of land.
- I want a place with the king's warriors.
- [brothers chuckle]
[David] I want to
fight with you.
There is no honor in fighting
for that king. Father is right.
No. no. He's wrong.
There is great honor in it.
David. you will not make it a dozen
paces before an enemy cuts you down.
Can we just go home?
I can fight. I know I can.
This… This is not fighting.
This is chasing the birds away.
[shouts]
- I was drinking that.
- [chuckles]
[David] Okay. Watch this.
Two jars at once.
Go on.
[breathes deeply]
- [chuckles]
- [David] I want to fight with you.
David. I cannot place you with the
king's warriors. You know this.
David. you should've kept this.
Could be useful to you.
You know. shear
the sheep with it.
My knife works just fine. I
killed the old king with it.
[chuckles] A lion?
[stammering] Last time I heard
this story. it was a bear.
[David] It was a bear.
What next? A dragon?
- You don't believe me?
- [Abinadab] No.
He gave me this.
- [Abinadab] Ah.
- [chuckles]
Oh. wow.
I do not know or care
if any of that is true.
but this I know.
An Amorite gave me this.
A Philistine this.
and an Amalekite gave me this.
- Being Hebrew gave me this.
- And Shlomo gave me this.
Because I am a warrior.
That is my design.
You. David. you are a poet
and you are a shepherd.
- You are not a man of blood.
- I am a warrior.
You are not.
Eh. a Benjamite
woman. Pointy teeth.
Show him. Show him.
Eliab. please. Can
you talk to Joab?
[chuckles] Joab. The man
that you provoked last night.
- He listens to you. he's a commander.
- Under Abner.
- Just ask.
- [Eliab] I will not.
- Please.
- I will not defy our father.
He is the one that put
you in those hills.
and he is the reason you
will never leave them.
- Fine.
- Hmm.
Then I will find my own way.
- To the battlefield?
- [David] Yes.
Very well.
- Come on.
- What?
If you truly want to
see what death is like.
I will show you.
Okay.
[both grunting]
[Jonathan grunting]
Your anger serves you
well on the battlefield.
But not here.
[both grunting]
- [groans]
- [strains] You asked me to spar.
There's more on your mind.
[both grunting]
[groaning]
- You know me well. my prince.
- [grunting]
[groaning. panting]
Since the days wooden swords
were all we had to fight with.
[chuckles]
[breathing heavily]
We fought with pitchforks…
and shepherd's staffs.
Tooth and nail if we had to.
Yet we conquered.
as we must now.
[Jonathan] My father vanquished
armies who had metal and bronze.
Now he cannot
defeat his own mind.
We've come so far. Abner.
Why would God do this?
I am but a soldier.
- God does not talk to me.
- But surely my father did.
What did Samuel say to him?
You must ask him that yourself.
But one thing is clear.
Your reign is coming.
My father is the king of Israel.
Your father struggles
to get out of bed.
[Saul] Why did no one
invite me to spar?
[chuckles]
Ah. forgive me. my king. Uh.
I thought you might need
another 11 days to rest.
I've never felt better.
A moment with my son. Abner.
What troubles you. Son?
Speak it now.
What did Samuel say to you?
Doesn't matter? [grunting]
Father. he's been angry before.
Whatever this is.
you will make
sacrifices with him.
All will be forgotten.
[Jonathan grunting]
[Saul] All will
not be forgotten.
Samuel is an old man.
Jealous of the power he lost.
Is that what you think he is?
I fear that is
what he has become.
That's not the man I know.
[grunting]
[groans]
[grunts. panting]
He's a voice of the Most High.
I've loved him all my life.
You taught me this.
All men change.
[breathing heavily]
[grunts]
- [shouts]
- [grunts]
You will be ready
when the time comes.
I promise.
But I'm still king.
Remember this.
Where is your sister?
[priest] I wish I had an
apprentice as diligent as you.
Ahimelech. I hope you do not mind. I…
I know I'm not meant to be in here.
Your secret is safe with me.
[Saul speaks Hebrew]
My sweet.
Father.
Are you supposed to have that?
Ahimelech affords me
special privileges.
I am the daughter of
the king. after all.
[chuckles]
There was no copy of the law of Moses
in the poor village of Benjamin.
We are stewards of
great privilege.
I'm glad to see you use it.
What are you reading?
Well. the people were
plagued by venomous snakes.
God told Moses to take
a-a copper serpent.
and set it upon a pole.
and lift it up for
all the people to see.
And all those who
looked upon it lived.
Healed.
Instantly. [chuckles]
Do you think it really happened?
In my heart. yes.
Then why will God not heal you?
Who says I'm not healed?
I have something to show you.
When I was young. we barely heard of
gold or bronze. let alone seen it.
Yet in the streams
east of the Negev.
if you looked in the right
places. there were these stones.
Unlike any other.
You could search for a month
and not find such a stone.
Your mother loved them.
We would spend endless hours
searching for them together.
But in truth.
I was simply trying to
convince her to marry me.
So I had this made for her.
Do you think she will like it?
[Mychal] I think she will
cherish them for eternity.
To remind her of better times.
Fear not. my child.
All things will
turn for the good.
You have my word.
Hey.
Can I ask you a question?
Why not? We have
nothing else to do.
What are your memories of her?
My mother.
Sometimes I feel like
she's fading away from me.
I would rather not
remember that time.
The passing of your mother.
the guilt you carry.
Sometimes I feel…
it proves life can
be cruel and unjust.
especially when facing things
that cannot be changed.
She was a woman of great
conviction and warmth.
Her songs would fill the house.
And I regret being
so unkind to her.
Hey.
You wish to run away
to war and barbarism?
There it is.
Who did this?
That remains a mystery.
We should discover
the truth then.
You think you might do what
Prince Jonathan couldn't?
He believes it to
be the work of…
What?
No.
Nah.
[clicks tongue]
[Philistine soldiers whistling]
We are being watched.
[whispering] David.
[sighs]
[David gasps]
[Achish] Are you a Hebrew?
Was this your home?
No. I am not from this place.
Did you come alone?
Alone. and I know nothing.
Are you from the tribe of
Judah? Tribe of the lion.
I killed a lion.
Impressive.
My brothers do not believe me.
Oh. I've done many things
my brethren do not believe.
Greatness is often dismissed
by those closest to us.
[grunting. groaning]
This is bronze. A Philistine?
- [choking]
- Philistine?
[body thuds]
Your people have a
legend. do they not?
Anak? Anakim?
- Sons of Anak?
- Yes.
Giants.
Made when the sons of God descended.
had children by the daughters of men.
- And you believe in them?
- I believe all the words of Moses.
Moses.
who drowned the Egyptian army
by parting the Great Sea.
Hashem drowned the army.
Moses was his vessel.
- Hashem? The name?
- The god of gods.
Is he? And there
can be no other?
We need no other.
Then I must ask you.
can your god save you now?
David. run!
[pants. grunts]
[David groans. grunts]
[panting]
[Eliab shouts]
[grunts]
[Philistine soldier 1 groans]
Run! Go.
David!
[both grunting]
[grunting]
- David. go.
- [breathing shakily]
[Eliab] Go.
- [Eliab grunting]
- [Philistine soldier 2 groans]
[groans]
[Philistine soldier 3 groans]
[breathing heavily]
[pants]
[grunting]
[Eliab grunting]
- [Philistine soldier 4 grunts]
- [grunts]
[Philistine soldier 4 groans]
- [pants] David. Come on. Let's go. Go.
- [David panting]
- [both panting]
- Eliab.
[grunting]
[Philistine soldier 5 groans]
[Philistine soldier 6 grunts]
- [Eliab screams]
- [shouting]
[Eliab] Go. Go.
Eliab. over here. [panting]
[Eliab] David!
[grunts] No. [gasping]
- Eliab. No. Eliab!
- [breathes sharply. groans]
Shall I summon more
men? Finish them?
No. It is done.
We have bigger prey to hunt.
[speaking Hebrew]
[groans]
[sighs]
I've got it.
I-I've got it. I-I-I've got it.
I've got it. Leave it!
I'm sorry. Josiah.
Don't want you to have
to witness these things.
The Lord will bless
and keep you. my king.
Give you sleep.
[Saul sighs]
You fear sleep.
This raging in my mind.
what if it's a
battle I cannot win?
You win every battle.
You defeat every enemy.
And you have made their
fallen fortress our home.
Are you happy here?
It's a bit drafty.
[chuckles]
Lie with me. Come.
Remember our first home?
[Saul's spouse] Mmm.
We were all together.
Life was simple.
It was a safe haven.
'Cause you were there.
That's all I needed.
[Saul's spouse sighs]
Sleep. my love.
Sleep and come back to me.
Please come back to me.
[Jonathan] Did you make this?
[partner] Do you like it?
[Jonathan] It's beautiful.
[partner] This will protect
you. It will be your armor.
[Jonathan] Adonai. who
delivered us from Egypt.
do not turn your back on us now.
May the sacrifices of those who
have died be worthy to your purpose.
Please.
show me your purpose.
[metal scraping]
[Saul] Samuel…
Samuel…
I will slay you.
The king will cut down
the judge of Israel.
[Jonathan] Mother?
Jonathan.
[Saul] I will slay you.
I will cut you down like…
Cut you down like
the tall grass.
Grass that withers and fades…
[Jonathan] Father?
…and is forgotten.
- All is forgotten!
- [Jonathan] Father!
All is forgotten!
[grunting. groaning]
[Jonathan] Father.
[Abner] Saul. no! No. Saul!
No! [grunting. groaning]
- [Saul straining]
- [Abner] No!
- Father!
- [straining]
- [screaming]
- [sword clatters]
[all panting]
[Jonathan] Father.
[speaks indistinctly] Father.
Jonathan.
- Help me.
- I will.
How has it come to this?
[Abner] He must rest.
Come. Let's take you
back to your bed.
Come.
[breathing shakily]
- [David grunting. panting]
- [Eliab panting]
[strains] Eliab.
Wake up. wake up.
- [breathing heavily]
- Wake up.
- Leave me.
- [panting]
I will never make it.
Wake up.
[grunts]
You've been through
war. remember? Hmm?
It is too far.
No. No!
Listen. Listen.
I am stronger than you think.
Look at me.
I am stronger than
you think. Come.
[grunting]
["Beautiful Horizon" playing]